# Epistasis
### Neko Juers


> There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having been
> originally breathed into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this
> planet has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so
> simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been,
> and are being, evolved.

Charles Darwin



## Challenge

We've been reading stories about machine-mediated eschatology for decades.
Genre blindness be damned, we were at least conceptually prepared. But we were
expecting sentience! Not a virus. All the war and famine in human history pale
in comparison to the body count visited by infectious disease. So it's only
appropriate that a computer virus should destabilize society, now that we'd
effectively erased every commonly deadly pathogen from the planet.

It started as all computer viruses do. Someone was bored. Namely, Satsuke
Hajime, a precocious, neurodivergent, 16 year-old aspiring physicist--
unfortunately one with no understanding of biology. No understanding of
parasite host-switching. No understanding of evolutionary innovation. No
understanding of the implications of exponential growth! He was good at coding,
though. It's sort of amazing someone took so long to come up with the idea;
after all biological viruses have been doing it for eons, but his central
innovation was mutation, which allowed the virus to penetrate varyingly
effective consumer antivirus software, despite its creators' best efforts to
keep up. He wasn't after money. He was just having fun.

Of course the best human minds were orders of magnitude of orders of magnitude
slower than even the most modest computing clusters, so we had to be much more
creative, and arrived at the conclusion that more computers were the only
answer.

Another "of course": our creativity was limited. Yes, we've written books and
music, directed pornography, figured out that $e^(i \pi)$ = 1--whatever that
means, arrived at the conclusion that the best temperature to sous-vide ribeye
is 137 degrees Fahrenheit, etc., etc. But we---and the machines---had nothing
on nature and its many small experiments, which met our Nabokov, our Aguilera,
our Depardeaux, our Escher, our Darwin, and our Leno with parasites that
manipulate their hosts' reproductive biology or brains as a boon to their own
reproduction, bacteria that can thrive in pools of brimstone to the delight of
middle-aged tourists, and shrimps with sonic boom-producing appendages. All
from ignorant variation that may or may not do anything in a given ecological
circumstance according to relatively simple stochastic processes that we have
studied mathematically and empirically for quite a while. Chaos is nothing if
not creative. In fact, one might stretch the definition a little and posit that
the Creator *is* chaos. So we weaponized God.

Our Ark of the Covenant was MUPET. Massively Parallel (Un)supervised
Evolutionary Test-Driven Development. We developed the acronym for fun, as
scientists are wont to do, when we still had fun. Not quite as much fun as the
copper nanotubes people had with theirs, but still fun. Graeme Pateras was the
director and head of research and development at the Federal Computing Research
Agency, whose idea it was.

As the name implies, test driven development is based on the notion that the a
computer program should be written with an explicit goal in mind, and that each
element of a program should be tested in its place every time a change is made,
so as not to introduce new errors when a different function is changed, or
simply to make sure everything works correctly *and continuously*. So we write
a test function that fails if the specified return value is not what is
expected in the test. Every time we change something, we run the test suite
again, and we keep everything working. This is ideally done from the ground up;
the tests form a scaffold on which to build a computer program.

 MUPET was first used by physiologists to approximate the energy burden of
 sperm production in cattle. This allowed nontechnical researchers to carry out
 their analyses simply by specifying what output they hoped for, to be
 delivered to their displays by brute force rather than their own sweat shed
 from at the same time learning programming, statistics, how to navigate social
 situations with awkward scientists at elaborate faculty dinners, and finally
 whatever discipline they worked in.

This was Pateras's first job out of grad school, but he studied under someone
who studied under someone who studied under someone who studied under Douglas
Hofstadter, so he was important. He mused that by randomly seeding legions of
simple computer programs with instructions at random we could successively
approximate the desired program by allowing the programs with results of
arbitrarily specified closeness to the target output to replicate itself with
more variations. We did this at the exaflops scale.

I was the one who suggested MUPET as a solution. I've discussed the general
paradigm--specifying a target and letting the computer figure it out. This is
the supervised part. Well, there are different kinds of mutations. The simplest
is simply that a bit is flipped from 0 to 1 or vice-versa. But as in genetics,
there are lots of different kinds of mutations. For instance, sometimes the
insertion of a line, or the transposition of a line of code, or the duplication
of a line, or the insertion of a random bit of code. Sky's the limit. From
these mutations, the program learns which types of mutations approximate the
desired output the best, and under which circumstances, and preferentially
mutate the program in ways that are more likely to land near the target. This
is the unsupervised part. This removed the ignorance. It *vastly* increased the
efficency of the evolutionary programming algorithm, as if a mosquito now had
some idea of *exactly how* to reproduce as quickly as possible, as well as the
agency to realize it.

Of course chaos is never malevolent, but definitely, as it turns out,
self-interested. In retrospect, allowing a replicator to direct its own
evolution probably isn't the best idea, but we pushed on because there was a
lot of science that needed doing and not enough researchers to do it.

When the virus arrived, we were prepared. After all, our evolutionary algorithm
was vastly better than the dumb virus. We didn't anticipate that a compute
cluster in Delhi, upon whose hard disk was stored was the source code for MUPET
and the virus--it was being used for research to defeat the virus, after all.
The the virus's virulence (malevolence, even?) couldn't do anything with MUPET,
as it was a simple replicator with a simple immune avoidance mechanism. But
MUPET found the virus, both of which were stored in Wilson Kumar's home
directory, and incorporated its source code into itself during some research
program or another to figure out how to defeat it. Yet again, this wasn't
without biological precedent. Legions of retroviruses have incorporated
themselves into our genomes, obtaining a free evolutionary ride for as long as
our lineage exists. One of them is vital to pregnancy.

So the plague began. The virus had acquired whatever notion of consciousness we
imbued into MUPET, we created the world's first sentient plague, and shit was
about to get real.

Writing tests was vastly simpler than writing programs *and* tests, so blind to
our own cynicism, we had prisoners do it when it became apparent that teams of
well-trained and compensated computer scientists simply couldn't do it fast
enough. One of these was Hajime himself. His virus, the judiciary had decided,
singlehandedly unleashed a lahar on modernity. So he was commended to the care
of the World Incarceration Agency for life, located on a barren, godforsaken
patch of land with a tolerable climate, of which there are many, but the one we
settled on was in Ukraine. By two years into the plague most prisons had been
transformed into brightly lit coding facilities that resembled the call centers
from the first half of the century. So here, inmates would be trained to crank
out unit tests for ten hours a day, hoping to stumble on some configuration
that might lead to an solution under the pretext that they would be learning
valuable skills they could leverage to find employment post-incarceration.

Evolutionary disease ecology tells us that any parasite will burn itself out
and become extinct if it becomes so virulent that it kills its hosts too
quickly. Fortunately, this meant there was an upper limit to just how much
disruption the virus could cause, however our need for computers meant that
they didn't get switched off, thus incapacitating the virus, so despite their
virulence--in the form of trillions of wasted compute cycles-- increased the
energy consumed by the planet by a factor of ten, far more than what had been
previously considered "alternative energy" could keep up with. We started by
exhorting citizens to monitor their own energy use, telling the people of
Galveston that they should be judicious with their air conditioners and led
strips and whatnot. This was pantomime, however, because all the simple
electronics in the world used a tenth of the energy that the computers did. We
were desparate, and no amount of individual responsibility would fix it.

So we made the controversial decision to start burning coal again. Our virally
crippled supercomputers were so inefficient that we did as much climate damage
in a decade as in the previous century. And so, well, a lot of people--mostly
in the unfortunate world, which is what we now called the "developing world",
because it made styled progressives more comfortable as they felt it didn't
smack of economic chauvenism--died.

There is a peculiar phenomenon in biology called meiotic drive, which we have
exploited for pest control in the past. This works by endowing a particular
allele with the ability to destroy nascent individuals which do not have a copy
on both chromosomes. This allows a trait that negatively affects the fitness of
its posessor to proliferate because despite the fitness consequences to the
individual, the gene itself does a wonderful job of reproducing. The innovation
we came up with was to introduce an analogous mechanism in the MUPET-virus
symbiont complex. We engineered a variant of the virus to have an element that
would engage a similar drive --though no meiosis is involved-- *and* completely
switch off the virulence of the virus as well as its mutative capacity, and did
the same to MUPET--but only after many generations. Then we released it into
the world after making it exceptionally virulent and just stopped. We stopped
working; we stopped watching pornography; we stopped video calling. We just
stopped. Within a week, every internet-connected computer on the planet was
cranking out MUPET-viruses full-time, and our variant outcompeted the existing
one on each of them. By the tenth day, the requisite number of generations had
passed, the driver switched on, the virulence switched off, and within another
week every single internet-connected computer in the world now had a completely
nonfunctional virus.

And we won. And we were proud of ourselves.



## Innovation

The World became convinced that the reach of the Coca-Cola Company should be
limited after the death rate from obesity in South America became noticable
enough due a reduction in the world's coffee supply. So, after mounting
pressure from its stockholders due to the increased public unrest over the
social injustices committed against South America by Coca-Cola, Coca-Cola
restructured itself as a financial services agency that did quite well at
finding venture capitalists to invest in environmental restoration efforts in
the unfortunate world. It then became more profitable than Citi, as the value
of money had declined due to increasing reliance on cryptocurrency and voters
had forced the company to reduce its consumer loan marketing after the latest
recession had hit particularly hard and forced many professionals located in
the nation's technology centers into bankruptcy. Following this, Citi
reorganized itself into varyingly successful subdivisions, including one that
did ok at finding venture capitalists to invest in in environmental
restorations effors in the unfortunate world, and the most successful one that
sold *Cannabis*-infused soft drinks, which attracted the attention of the
Coca-Cola company.

So Coca-Cola acquired Citi.

MUPET had only been used for research so far, but its success against the
Plague had brought it into the public eye. In CitiWorks--Citi's cybernetics
division--*an engineer* now had the idea to use MUPET to develop robotics
software.

Robotics software is somewhat low-level and compared to the just-in-time
compiled languages that were now used for almost everything else.  <span
style="color:blue">Why is robotics software low-level?</span> As can be seen,
inevitabley, low-level programming became an exceedingly niche skill, that
ultimately became unsustainably expensive for employers to pursue, which had
effectively stalled robotics development for the last decade, Invis-ble Hand be
damned. So again, MUPET came to the rescue.

On February 3 --fuck it-- the dissertation was submitted with the title *A
stochastic evoltionary algorithm applied to problems of compiled codebase
prototyping" was submitted to the Cornell University's Department of
Computational Biology and approved unanimously with no edits from her
committee.

The problem was that miniaturization had led to increasingly high-pressure
lubricanted interfaces, which accelearted the deterioration of the lubricant.

*boredome of reading papers: abstracts*
*optimizing temp management for high pressure drilling apparatus*
*glass transition temperature of silicone oils*
*consolidation of corporate power by mergers*
*as can be seen*

She had immediately been hired by Google, now housed under the umbrella of
Tesla, Inc.  *A note on the timeline: It doesn't fucking matter.*
